We would like to welcome all of you
to this update on the situation facing
our brothers in Russia.
As you know, on April 20th,
the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation
ruled against Jehovah’s Witnesses
and decided to liquidate
the Administrative Center
of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia
and all of our Local Religious Organizations.
We appealed this decision,
and the hearing for the appeal
took place in Moscow on July 17th.
Sadly, the three-judge panel upheld
this unjust decision against us,
which effectively bans
our religious activity in Russia.
In a few moments,
we will be speaking
with Brother Mark Sanderson
of the Governing Body,
who was with our brothers
during the appeal hearing in Moscow.
But before we talk
to Brother Sanderson,
let’s first visit with the delegation
that accompanied him
in attending
the Supreme Court hearing.
The delegation’s resolve
to help our brothers in Russia
reassures us of the unity
of our organization
and the need for all of us
to face challenges with courage.
We are en route to Heathrow Airport.
I’m flying to Frankfurt
to meet up with some brothers
who are heading off to Moscow together
to go to the Supreme Court hearing
on July the 17th.
Our delegation is made up
of 20 brothers from 18 different lands.
I truly love the brothers in Russia.
I’ve had association with them
for many years.
I was in a Russian congregation,
and so my heart is right
with the brothers and sisters in Russia.
I worked in the Russian-language field
for 13 years before I came to Bethel.
So I feel like
the Russian brothers and sisters
are really my family.
Everywhere I go,
the brothers are always asking,
“How are the friends in Russia?”
And they want me to reassure them
that they have been praying for them,
and that’s not just mature brothers
in the congregation
—young children ask the question as well
because they have been taught to pray
for their brothers in Russia.
I could have filled up my luggage
with many drawings
from the children in Belgium
for the brothers
—their little brothers in Russia.
And we also have heard of some cases
of inactive brothers and sisters
who have been deeply moved
by the determination
of our brothers in Russia.
The brothers in Sweden
were so impressed
by their fine attitude,
especially when the police
were raiding the Kingdom Halls.
Sometimes they were threatened,
but they were sitting there quiet and calm,
and they were not insulting in return.
Do I fear going to Russia
where our work is under ban?
Not at all.
There is no reason to be afraid.
I am ready to join my brothers
and stand by their side
in this historic moment.
I’m not afraid to go to Russia,
not because I feel I’m so strong,
but because I feel
that Jehovah is going to be with us
and he’s the one
who is going to be supporting us.
Our intent is to try to meet
with as many of the high officials
from the various embassies
in Moscow as possible.
We have done those meetings
in the spirit of 1 Peter 3:15
where it says that we should defend
our faith and our hope,
but do it “with a mild temper
and deep respect.”
And that’s what we have done.
We don’t demand
anything from the officials,
but we tell them
what’s the situation with our brothers.
The court case
against our brothers in Russia
in some aspects
resembles the court case
against Jesus Christ.
In Luke 22:67,
when asked if he was the Christ,
Jesus said to the Sanhedrin:
“Even if I told you,
you would not believe it at all.”
Similarly, our brothers
have been able to show striking evidence
to prove that the charges against us
are completely unfounded.
But despite such evidence,
which is clear even to non-Witnesses,
it is as if we have said nothing.
Such treatment of God’s people, though,
is to be expected in these last days.
But now, we have
Brother Mark Sanderson
of the Governing Body
tied in with us.
And first we’d like to say, Mark,
thank you very much
for joining us for this interview.
And especially,
thank you very much
for being with the brothers
there in Russia.
Well, thank you so much, Steve.
It really was a joy and really an honor
to be with our brothers
in the courtroom in Russia.
But now,
let me ask you this:
What impact will this decision
have on our brothers
and sisters in Russia?
Well, perhaps it’s too early
to know exactly
what will take place.
But certainly,
when we met with various officials
at the embassies in Moscow,
their feeling is that this is going
to give open license
for individuals who are prejudiced
to really just take out their feelings
on all of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Already we’ve seen incidences
of Witnesses having their homes burned;
we’ve had Kingdom Halls
be vandalized;
we’ve had children harassed
at school by their teachers;
we’ve had brothers threatened
with loss of employment,
so we can expect
that we will see
greater persecution in that land.
Well, we’re sorry to hear that,
but we know that’s reality.
But let me ask you,
Are there options for appeal
available at this point?
Well,
within the country of Russia,
we’ve exhausted
all of the available appeals.
But of course,
we are going to take this matter
to the European Court
of Human Rights.
In fact,
within the next day or two,
we will be applying
for what is called “interim measures,”
where the European Court,
if they choose,
can step in
and even attempt to block
the carrying out
of a major decision.
Of course, really it’s very uncertain
as to whether Russia
will actually respect
the actions of the European Court.
We’ll have to wait and see.
Mark,
do you see any Scriptural parallels
to the events you witnessed
at the Supreme Court?
You know, Steve,
I couldn’t help but continually think
of what Jesus had said
in Matthew 5:11
when he said
that they would “lyingly say
every sort
of wicked thing against you.”
And that is just exactly
what we heard again
this time
during the appeal hearing.
These officials
were just repeating
these ridiculous accusations
against Jehovah’s Witnesses,
attempting to even equate us
with terrorist groups.
Now,
already the authorities of the world
are speaking out about this.
The United States Commission
on International Religious Freedom,
on Monday,
already issued a statement.
And maybe I can just read you
the first paragraph
of this statement that was released.
They said: “The U.S. Commission
on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF)
“denounces the Russian Supreme Court
ruling on Monday
“rejecting an appeal
by the Jehovah’s Witnesses
“against an April decision
declaring them as extremist.
“USCIRF Chairman
Daniel Mark commented
“that ‘The Supreme Court’s decision
sadly reflects the government’s
“‘continued equating
of peaceful religious freedom practice
“‘to extremism.
“‘The Witnesses
are not an extremist group,
“‘and should be able
to practice their faith openly
and freely and
without government repression.’”
So these government officials of the world
—they recognize the truth.
They understand that these charges
that have been laid against us
are truly ridiculous and absurd.
What a powerful statement
you read there!
Now, we learned in the segment
we just watched
that the brothers in the delegation
had an opportunity to speak
to embassy representatives in Moscow.
Let me ask you, Mark,
What were the results of those meetings?
Well, just to begin, Steve,
I’d like to just comment
about the courage of these men
who accepted
this assignment to go to Moscow.
You know, when they were invited
to come on this assignment,
not one of these men
even for a moment asked a question like:
“Is this safe?”
“Will I be in danger
in going on this assignment?”
Immediately they said yes
and began making their plans.
And then once in Moscow,
we divided into five different groups
so that we could visit the embassies
of the countries that we belonged to.
And so, myself,
I was assigned to go
with the group that met
with four different embassies.
We visited the United States,
the United Kingdom,
the European Union,
and Canada.
And at each of these four embassies,
we were given a beautiful reception.
In one case,
we met with an ambassador;
in two cases,
we met with deputy ambassadors;
and in the final one,
we met with one of the secretaries.
But I have to say,
as these people listened
to what we had to say,
of course they’re already
very informed about our issue,
the question that kept coming
over and over again was:
“Why Jehovah’s Witnesses?
“Why is it that Jehovah’s Witnesses
are receiving
this kind of attention
from the government?”
Well, we were able
to give a very, very fine witness
and include many Scriptural thoughts.
And particularly to one ambassador
who’s a real gentleman
and really listened to us patiently,
we were able to say
that Jehovah’s Witnesses have come
through the concentration camps
in the Nazi times,
we’ve survived being exiled to Siberia,
we survived the work camps in the Gulag,
and all of this because
of the protection of our God, Jehovah.
That’s why we’re still here,
and we continue to look
to our God, Jehovah, for his protection.
And so the reason that we had come
to see these officials
was because
we are reasonable people,
and we wanted to talk
to other reasonable people
to see what might be done
to help our brothers and sisters.
And these officials
were so extremely receptive
to this type of approach.
And what an honor
it was to be able
to praise the name
of Jehovah before them!
Very encouraging, Mark.
How did the brothers,
though, react
when they heard the negative decision?
Well, you know, Steve,
there’s always been
a joyful presence in the courtroom
on these different occasions
when I’ve been present in Russia,
but this time
with the reading of this decision,
there is certainly
a soberness among our brothers,
and they recognize
the seriousness of this matter.
But I have to say,
I think the apostle Paul
really sums up the way
our brothers feel in Russia.
In 2 Corinthians 4:8,
where he said:
“We are hard-pressed
in every way,
“but not cramped
beyond movement;
“we are perplexed,
“but not absolutely
with no way out;
“we are persecuted,
but not abandoned;
we are knocked down,
but not destroyed.”
And I think just even in a small way,
you know where it says
that “we are persecuted,
but not abandoned,”
I think that to have
this international delegation
in the courtroom;
to see that brothers
were willing to come,
risking their own safety
to support the brothers;
to be there with them
in the courtroom at this difficult time
was just a reassurance
that Jehovah himself was with them
and that these representatives,
in some small way,
represented to them
Jehovah’s love, Jehovah’s care,
and that certainly
we were not going to abandon
our dear brothers in Russia,
no matter what situation may come.
I like that thought too, Mark,
that we’re knocked down
but we’re not destroyed.
We could say we’re knocked down
but not knocked out.
That’s right.
With Jehovah’s help,
we get back up again.
But now, how have our brothers
and sisters in Russia been faring
since the first Supreme Court
ruling in April?
Well, you know, Steve,
as I mentioned earlier,
there have been many incidents
across the country of vandalism,
of attacks, of course.
We’ve been reporting on jw.org
about our dear
Brother Dennis Christensen
who was arrested
and has been held now
for two months, basically,
in the prison there in Russia.
He has not been allowed to communicate
with his wife during this time.
And now we learned,
when we were present in Russia,
that the officials only allow him
to shower twice a week.
Can you imagine?
Treating him as though
he was a very, very serious criminal
when all he did
was attend a meeting
to read God’s Word
and worship Jehovah.
What a horrible thing!
And of course, the officials
from all the countries of the world
recognize the terrible, terrible injustice
that’s being done here.
But having said that,
in spite of these attacks
that we have seen across the country,
what we also see is
that our brothers and sisters
are continuing
in their worship for Jehovah.
They’re continuing
to have their meetings.
One of the brothers
commented to me, he said:
“Some who used to
never comment at the meetings,
“now they love to come
and comment and express themselves.
“Some who have been inactive
have begun
to attend the meetings again.”
And one brother told me
that when they held
a small mini-convention,
you know, watching some of the replays
that have been made available,
that just in their small group,
they had five baptized.
Can you imagine?
So we can say with confidence
that all of these efforts
that are being made
to try to stop our worship of Jehovah,
to wipe it out,
are not going to have any success.
It really reminds me,
would it be OK
if I just shared
this Scriptural thought?
Absolutely!
Please.
It just makes me think
of this thought in Psalm 124.
And this really has to be
the confidence of our brothers in Russia,
but it needs to be the confidence, really,
of God’s people all around the world.
We have to put
our faith in these words.
It says:
“If Jehovah had not been with us,”
this is verse 2:
“If Jehovah had not been with us
“when men
rose up to attack us,
“then they
would have swallowed us up alive
“when their anger
was burning against us.
“Then the waters
would have washed us away,
“the torrent
would have swept over us.
“The raging waters
would have overwhelmed us.
“May Jehovah be praised,
“for he has not given us
as prey to their teeth.
“We are like a bird that escaped
from the hunter’s trap;
“the trap was broken,
and we escaped.
“Our help is
in the name of Jehovah,
the Maker of heaven and earth.”
Well, you know,
so many times,
our enemies have thought
that they had us locked in that trap
and that there
was no way to escape,
but how Jehovah
has proven them wrong,
and how he has come
to the aid of his people!
And that is the same confidence
that we have today,
and it’s the same confidence
our brothers will have.
It’s the same confidence we’ll have
no matter where we are in the world
as the scene of this world
continues to change.
We wholeheartedly agree with you,
and it definitely warms our heart
to hear these strengthening comments.
Thank you very much, Mark,
and thank you again, too,
and the rest of the delegation,
for traveling to Russia
to be with our dear brothers and sisters.
And we’re confident
that your presence assured them
of Jehovah’s love
and Jehovah’s care for them.
Thank you so much, Steve.
As I said, it was a great,
great honor and privilege.
I truly love our dear brothers in Russia.
Although the appeal decision
was not in our favor,
we are not disheartened.
As our regional convention theme
for this year emphasizes,
we do not give up!
Brothers and sisters in Russia,
we encourage you
to stay close
to Jehovah and his organization.
Continue to pray to Jehovah for strength
to face this persecution with boldness,
knowing he will provide you
with the strength needed
along with the guidance
and wisdom that you need.
And please know
that you are excellent examples
for the rest of us to follow
when we face persecution.
We wholeheartedly agree
with the Bible writer’s expressions
in Habakkuk 3:18.
He said:
“Yet, as for me,
“I will exult in Jehovah;
“I will be joyful
in the God of my salvation.”
Yes,
whatever the world does to us,
we maintain our faith
in Jehovah’s saving power
and will do our utmost to remain
in Jehovah’s protective care.
This is JW Broadcasting
from the world headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses.